---
layout: post
title: "Numerics, part 1"
date: 2019-03-03 00:29:00 +0100
categories: yagnis update
permalink: /update/numerics-1
---
# Numerics, part 1

> This is a post draft.

This post focuses mainly on numeric literals ergonomics and the notion of **universal numeric type**. It also goes about why type inference is part of Yagnis.

> Disclaimer: I'm not by no means an Ada expert. As a general rule, take everything with a grain of salt.

## About Yagnis type inference

_What problems Yagnis tries to resolve through type inference?_ 

Compare these ficticious snippets:

```
// C++

AnExtremelyVerboseClassName a;
```

vs:

```
// Java

AnExtremelyVerboseClassName a = new AnExtremelyVerboseClassName();
```

The second one is also extremely redundant! However, there is a good use case for this:

```
// Java again

SuitableInterface b = new AnExtremelyVerboseClassName();
```

And don't get me wrong: I'm not against being explicit. Besides, I rather prefer a syntax that _allows_ being explicit (whether or not being optional is a defect, is up to you) than another which insists to get in the middle all the time. Especially when you already _were_ explicit, and yet you have to bear its terrible ergonomics.

Here a sane version of what Java does:

```
// Kotlin

var a = AnExtremelyVerboseClassName()
var b : SuitableInterface = AnExtremelyVerboseClassName()
```

> Java 10 includes the `var` type name. But Java should disappear altogether, now that Kotlin is here.

😈

Although Yagnis probably won't be 'object oriented', this example introduces an essential idea: _its purpose of using type inference is not to save typing, but to make you able to lessen meaningless code_, because it is bad to read or write.

Note how as a result of all this, there will also be situations where Yagnis _could_ save you from having to type adding some syntactic sugar, but won't do it anyways, because what can be omited is meaningful for human beings.

## Ada numeric literals

### Universal numeric types

[Ada](https://www.adacore.com/about-ada) is an statically and strongly typed programming language named after the first programmer in history, [Ada Lovelace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace). One the highlights of this language is its commitment to build safe systems squashing most of the bugs early, its type system is pleasently expressive...

Oh, and _it does not use type inference_:

```
X : Integer := 1234;
```

In fact, Ada works backward. Numeric literals belong to an **universal type** (`universal_integer`, `universal_real`, `universal_fixed` and `universal_access`). The type you gave to the variable 'casts' the value, so \*it can't be inferred instead.

> Actually, as named numbers in Ada need the `constant` keyword, we can speculate that a default integer type could be set (and I'm not saying it would be a good idea).

You can give such literals a name:

```
Pi : constant := 3.14159_26535_89793;
```

These [**named numbers**](https://www.adaic.org/resources/add_content/docs/95style/html/sec_3/3-2-6.html#example_above) remain unrestricted by a non-universal type, but 'proper' **constants** are also possible:

```
Pi : constant Float := 3.14159_26535_89793;
```

A good thing about this system is how it is used to represent calculations that can be resolved at _compile time_, when we just don't want the same restrictions we need to making them fit into a register:

```
PiSquared : constant := Pi**2;
```

Funnily enough, the previous statement works whether or not the `Pi` constant itself is restricted (in either case `PiSquared` will be an `universal_real`). We can push this further and add some variables to the computations:

```
-- Named number.
Pi : constant := 3.14159_26535_89793;

-- Variables.
R : Float := 42.0;
Area : Float;

-- ...

Area := Pi * R**2;
```

Note how the compiler checks that universal expressions fit the 'host' type restrictions, giving us some safety. Consider this:

```
Works : constant := Standard.Integer'Last;
Doesnt : constant := Standard.Integer'Last + 1;

-- ...

Result := Works;
Result := Doesnt;
```

For Ada, type inference does not seem a critical issue. We would prefer to move a lot of the calculations to the unrestricted compile-time world, and when it comes to it, just let the compiler check if the values can be casted to the specific types.

### Type prefixes and suffixes, and other inconsistencies

As numeric literals belong to universal types, there is no need for suffixing them in Ada (as they are in C-like languages) to carry its type around:

```
// C#

var pi = 3.141592653589793f;
```

Another misfeature of those languages can be found in implicit casts:

```
// Professor Frink: In C, Pi is exactly three!

#include<stdio.h>

int main() {

    int pi =
        3.141592653589793f;

    printf("Hello, Reckless World! Pi is %d.", pi);
}
```

From time to time, you need to represent numbers with binary, octal or hexadecimal notation. These languages use prefixes to get it:

```
// Octal
0777

// Hexadecimal
0xAA55

// Binary (widely **unsupported**)
0b0110_0010
```

Octal notation is unexpected to newcomers, and they most probably learn about it when it bites them (`0777 != 777`). Apart from syntax, all of them are lacking.

What about inconsistent representations? You can type `3.` instead of `3.0`. Or you can type just `3` and let it be implicitly casted to `3.0` (and thus you'll get the next programmer confused about if it was an error).

Or maybe you prefer typing `.1415` instead of `0.1415`, believing that removing a meaningful character will save you hours of work. Madness!

In C-like languages, the default numeric types are `int` and `double`. If you have worked with any library which makes heavy use of `float` (let's say the Unity3D library), you probably know how annoying is this to read or write:

```
var a = 1f;
var b = 4.6f;
var c = 2.3f;
var d = .5f;

// ...

// Here 10 and 10.0 would be casted implicitly to 10.0f.
foo (a, b, c, d, 10);
```

> I personally suffer a lot when reading code like this from others, and I have ended up using the more specific notation all the time.

Any of those points is a problem in [Ada](https://www.adacore.com/gems/ada-gem-7).

```
-- Universal integer literal.
A : Integer := 42; // 42.0 is invalid.

-- Universal real literals.
X : Float := 0.42; -- .42 is invalid.
Y : Float := 42.0; -- 42 and 42. are invalid.

--
Octal : Integer := 8#777#;
Hexadecimal : Integer := 16#AA55#;
Binary : Integer := 2#0110_0010#;

--
Kibibyte : Integer := 2#1#e+10;
```

There is more, long story short, Ada numeric types are a good influence for Yagnis.

## Yagnis integer types

> Currently it is unclear if I'll add real types to Yagnis.

The integer types can be the same as in Rust:

| Unsigned | Signed |
| ---: | ---: |
| u8| i8 |
| u16| i16 |
| u32| i32 |
| u64| i64 |
| u128 | i128 |
| usize | isize |

## Default integer type

As I said, in C-like languages the default numeric types are `int` and `double`. Similarly, `i32` and `f64` are the default types in Rust. But in Ada, the default are universal types, and I feel Yagnis should follow it.

This means that whenever you need a restricted type, you will need to be explicit.

'_Eh! But you said Yagnis has type inference!_'

I said type inference is used in Yagnis to fight meaningless code, not meaningful one. The numeric type you will need depends on what you want to do, so typing it you convey your intention clearly. Taking for granted that you will need doubles seems too arbitrary at this point.

This could be an issue when you just 'don't care', but still, I rather prefer to look for an explicit alternative (in the future) than to follow the 'C way'.

## Universal types and compile-time evaluated expressions

In Yagnis, constants are first-class citizens. Creating a constant requires less typing than creating a variable:

```
c : i32 = 42
v : var i32 = 42
```

As the default integer type is the universal integer, this maps 1:1 with the Ada syntax for named numbers, which are just universal constants which must be resolved at compile-time:

```
named_number := 42
run_time := get_number()
compile_time : i32 = 42

get_number() -> i32 { /* ... */}
```

Here, the remarkable difference with Ada is how this is integrated with the type inference system, so `run_time` is **not** a named number, but a `i32` run-time constant. It is run-time because the functions must be resolved (seemingly Ada does not support this kind of constants).

Finally, `compile_time` is another `i32` constant, but as with named numbers, must be resolved at compile-time.

Thus the language provides _slighly_ different semantics between compile-time and run-time non-universal constants. For instance, the first can be used to generate new named numbers disregarding the restrictions of their types.

An expression cannot be marked to be compile-time evaluated or not, but is not regarded as an optimization (is not up to the compiler if this is implemented or not). It is totally implied by the context.

Another example of semantic differences:

```
// constant, ct, i32.
compile_time : i32 = 42
// constant, ct, universal integer.
named_number := compile_time

// constant, rt, i32.
run_time := get_number()
// constant, rt, i32.
another_runtime := run_time
```
